The assignment simulated FICO's HELOC challenge, to build a high-performance model to identify high risk applications and reject them before manual review while identifying the reason for rejection. Aware that XGBoost performed well on the dataset, I considered highly interpretable models that similarly employed a sequential decomposition approach and naturally translated their classification approach into probabilities (which would be useful for threshold tuning down the road). Falling Rule Lists stood out as an optimal solution; FRL builds an ordered list of rules—two to three joined conditions on values of distinct features—corresponding to strictly decreasing positive-class probabilities, with each observation binned based on the first rule it satisfies. Thus, a rejection application would be a single rule, rather than the more common interpretable ML feature importance extrapolations.
I used Claude to reproduce the algorithm described, then optimized, across two academic papers. Following an exploratory process with the MARS algorithm in R, I directed Claude to expand the algorithm from a maximum of 2 conditions per rule to a maximum of 3 conditions per rule. I went in this direction because it offered non-trivial precision gains without sacrificing interpretability. However, it made the algorithm significantly more costly to run. Initially, hyperparameter tuning via a naive grid search took several hours. I used Claude to find areas of further optimization (including bitmasks for conditions, numpy replacing pandas, & a CELF greedy approach) and directed it to implement three optimizations that I identified myself: a coarse-to-fine grid search, dynamic programming for the bitmasks, and parallel processing to distribute the load of each cross-validation fold. The coarse-to-fine grid search quickly proved futile—the hyperparameter that justified efficiency gains with a coarse-to-fine approach, max number of conditions per rule, had non-removable interactions with downstream hyperparameters. After researching alternatives, I used Claude to implement a TPE search via the Optuna library instead. The resulting algorithm employs all but 1 of the device's CPU cores for roughly 20 minutes. 